---
title: "Some Holiness"
slug: "Some Holiness"
issue: "Winter"
issue_full_name: "Winter 2020"
year: "2020"
date: "2020-01-01"
authors: ['Eliya Smith']
section: "features"
audio: []
main_image: ""
banner_image: ""
images: []
videos: []
---

I am almost afraid to write down
This thing.

Once, when I was in middle school, I tripped on a jog. I skidded across the concrete and sliced open my knee; the cut was deep and bloody. The next morning, late for school per usual, I searched frantically for bandaids as I dressed. Failing to find any, I pulled on a pair of crisp white tights directly over my skin, so that they covered the gash sans mediation. By the end of the day, my body, presuming itself helpful, had introduced atop my knee a shiny new layer of skin. But this corporeal refurbishment went a little bit wrong: that baby’s-butt-soft membrane worked its way over the blood and pus and right through the stockings, sealing white microfiber into mushy sinew, covering the top of the fabric with a mushroom-colored blob. My knee, in other words, was attempting to seal my tights inside of it. 
I’ve always had a bit of a perverse fixation with the way objects can get stuck inside wounds. If you stare at a scrape long enough, it begins to resemble a little mouth torn open on the surface of your limb, a storybook monster gobbling up intruders piece by piece. At play practice the evening after my jogging fall, I sat in a corner and worked the tights out of my body, sobbing as I separated the new skin from the threads to which it had attached. The process was painful, and the sight made my stomach churn, but I insisted everyone I could find come watch. Isn’t it gross? Look how gross. C’mere. See? 
Success was only half won. The tights were no longer part of my body, but detaching the material from the human residue that clung to it proved impossible: even after many cycles in the washing machine, a peachy stain remained embedded in the fabric, a gruesome war trophy. And yet: I often found myself digging through the sock drawer to find that pair of tights on mornings I felt weak. 
***
...and the river,
That is supposed to be some holiness,
Starts dying,

They swim in the earth.

The simplest requirement of surviving a day at the swimming pool is that you must fend off the cold at all costs. Covet warmth — a dry towel, a spot in the sun, the invisible sweat you’ll need to make the water feel as though it has changed temperature. Cold is a form of death; it is the absence of heat, just as death is the absence of life. In Winter, cold overtakes even the sunniest pool: the frost sets in and the guards go back to tenth grade, and we are left with a shell of hollowed concrete, a giant’s grave. 
I did not know there were others who understood that pools could be secret graveyards until I read James Wright’s “The Old WPA Swimming Pool in Martins Ferry, Ohio.” I wondered, when I first read it, who told him to write that poem for me. 
I don’t know how he knew that when I think of home I see a little map, monopoly pieces dropped in a cluster that is house and school and ice cream and grannygrandpa’s house (the way my baby cousin once referred to my maternal grandparents, as an entity fused) — a little plastic village framed by the David H. Madison Community Pool to the north and the Jewish graveyard my people are lowered into, just past the sign advertising the LION’S DEN, ADULT SUPERSTORE, to the south. 
What I see when I go home to Ohio can be reduced, when factored down to its most base essentials, to a crude elementary-school water cycle diagram: all life cycling from graveyard to pool to graveyard on some days, pool to graveyard to pool on others. Our secret, Wright’s and mine, is that those two sites serve interchangeable functions; that is, pools and graveyards both hold a specific kind of eternal life. They both freeze time, or people, or people in time; or maybe it’s that they freeze time inside of people. These settings — community pool, burial ground — are strange bedfellows, perhaps, but to me, the poem’s fusion of them made perfect sense, felt so logical and safe as to resemble a sort of homecoming.  
***
Generally speaking, I am not a fan of poems. They do not make sense to me, which makes me feel unintelligent. Of greater concern: they do not make me feel things. When I stare at a modern art piece that is a toilet painted like a jellyfish, I do not know why it moves me or what visual techniques the artist has invoked in constructing it, but I feel sad all the same. When I read most poems, I feel nothing.
I don’t like being a philistine. I want to understand why enjambment and ekphrasis affect people. In a desperate last-ditch effort to make poetry less opaque before I graduated college, I enrolled in a poetry seminar this past Fall. Each Wednesday, we filed around a long wooden table, where the professor broke down poems cogently and simply, whispering the lines into substantive existence in a way I had not previously known was possible. 
It was about halfway through the term, as my resentment of poems had begun to thaw — slightly — that I encountered “The Old WPA Swimming Pool in Martins Ferry, Ohio.” Unlike the other poems that had resonated with me thus far in the curriculum, though, this poem did not require the assistance of Peter Sack’s fierce consonants and patient explanation. I knew what it meant when I read it. 
I flipped open to the poem one October morning, still half-asleep in my dorm room bed. I had been browsing haphazardly through our assigned Wright anthology, peeking up from the text every so often to check that the trees lining the river outside my window were continuing their steady progress toward a state of orange. 
The green was draining steadily
Steady progress toward orange (

In my bleary state, I settled on this poem for no reason other than that the title waved a friendly midwestern hello: “Uh-hi-uh,” I could hear my granny narrating, the way its denizens are wont to do, repudiating the roundness each end of the word requests. I found myself flattered by the safety of a ‘hi’ I could hide in, wrapped on either end inside those two familiar, mismatched O’s. I saw “swimming pool” and thought of my own, waiting patiently under a tarp for winter to start and finish. It was a cheap but effective trick of Wright to play on me, embalmed as I was in an eternal state of somewhat sickness for the landlocked humidity of my home. Without meaning to leave Cambridge, I found myself quite suddenly treading water — chickeneaglesnake kicks are more efficient than eggbeaters, my swim instructor is telling me — grasping for a lane line.
But it was not simply the superficial relief from homesickness that attracted me to Wright’s poem, or the easy nostalgia of soaking-wet summers that made its topography so welcoming. I’m quite certain, after all, that the pool Wright writes of hardly resembles the pool at which I spent my childhood summers turning pink, pressing my raisiny fingers together to see if the dehydrated crinkles wrought of too many hours in the water would disappear. No — “Old WPA Swimming Pool” takes us to the Martin’s Ferry of Wright’s childhood, ravaged by the Depression, gritty and ragged. My granny reports that my own David H. Madison Community Pool of Bexley, Ohio, on the other hand, was constructed in the 1960s, three decades after the Works Progress Administration revitalized American infrastructure. (Meaning our pool only came into existence after Granny had graduated from the same high school my mother and I would attend. So where did she bellyflop, I wonder, when she needed to escape the stuffy house she shared as a child with her cousins, aunts, and uncles?). Our pool, I recall, was further renovated in the 2010s, when lucrative income taxes from increasingly imposing Bexley homes purchased two slides and a sort of waterproof jungle gym. The exhausted workers that Wright marches through his poem — the uncles who pour out its concrete and the townspeople who splash in its waters — lived quite differently from those I encountered at my own pool growing up. 
In my early David H. Madison Bexley Community Pool memories, I am wading into the shallow end, strapping on floaties, ordering strawberry ice cream bars from the snack shack. I wear the same one-piece for so many days that when I undress in front of a mirror it looks like I am wearing a pale white swimsuit, my skin steadily bronzing around echoes of thin straps. I am a competitive swim team goddess, tri-county champion in the 25-Meter 6-and-Under Butterfly race, which basically means I can get from one side to the other without stopping to take a break, but nevertheless yields a host of ribbons I will store underneath my bed until I graduate high school. I wake up every morning for practice at an ungodly hour and I never complain. When practice ends I claim a lawn chair in the direct path of the sun, and it is mine until the mosquitos chase me home. 
I am, in one particularly trenchant memory, watching a boy remove his sweatpants; I realize moments before he does that in his predawn bleariness he forgot to put on his speedo, and that he’s standing in cotton briefs. He looks around to see if anyone has noticed and I politely avert my eyes, feeling extraordinarily powerful. I am flipping through a library book that I will be fined for because the chlorine has undone its binding when my mother gasps and says that there over there in the black trunks with the stripe down the side is her once-high school boyfriend. We cannot decide if he has seen her. Oh god; he has. We giggle. I am waving to my grandfather as he arrives every evening just before dinner to fit in his thirty laps. I continue to wave as the years progress and I quit swim team and I am worried what I look like in my swimsuit and his laps drop to twenty. I wave as Grandpa eases into the hole in the ground a few times a week now, ten laps, maybe eleven if he’s feeling macho. I am shaking inside a towel underneath a steadily darkening sky, waiting for dad and bike ride home and warm shower, hot soup. 
***
The families of the WPA had come out
To have a good time celebrating
A long gouge in the ground,
That the fierce husbands
Had filled with concrete.

At a certain point, “Old WPA Swimming Pool” begins to feel dead. Martin’s Ferry’s long-suffering inhabitants, seeking respite from their hunger, “swim in the earth” — a far apter euphemism for burial than description of literal aquatic habits. Wright describes the poem’s setting as “A long gouge in the ground” that, two lines later, is “filled with concrete.” “Fill,” is not a partial verb; what was intended to provide Wright’s town with pleasant relief from overly cheerful sunshine has been replaced with a massive rock, stubbornly inert.  
For Wright, the most terrifying permutation of a dead swimming pool is not a bone-dry hollow but instead the calcification of what’s left behind: filling that stifles, not emptiness that aches. It’s as though water, diving boards, clumps of hair, human limbs blend together and undergo a chemical transformation. Time stops, freezing the tableau. Life at the pool coalesces into a sludge that solidifies, dense and impenetrable. 
This is a terrifying prospect, becoming material residue, becoming what’s left behind. When my friends and I discuss death, as perfectly spry twenty-somethings are wont to do, most of them, anecdotally speaking, say that they will refuse to be buried. They fear the impartiality of decomposition, I think. If you dig a hole and put something inside of the earth, the earth does not care what that thing is. It will eat a wooden casket filled with human remains much faster than it will eat a WPA-sized swimming pool, but it will eat both all the same. The earth’s gravity pulls them down, in, and then shreds them into bits that will be soil. Death and life fuse together, the same way my wounded knee ingested microfiber in middle school. You can’t rip them apart.
***
I had seen by that time two or three
Holes in the ground,
And you know what they were.
I have loved you all this time,
And didn't even know
I am alive.

The summer I began my brief reign over the Bexley Marlins Swim Team Girls 6-and-Under Division was the summer we started driving out to the cemetery. The route we took led us past a large billboard sign advertising the LION’S DEN, ADULT SUPERSTORE. I found this sign condescending. I was big enough for the advanced reading group at school; I was big enough to bike without training wheels; I was big enough for cemeteries. Who were these stupid signmakers to decide that only adults were big enough for an extra-good store?
No one in my family ever commented on the sign. Probably this was because it advertised a sex shop, and I was six. At the time, its complete unacknowledgement led me to suspect that I might be the only person who could see it. And because it was a place forbidden unto me — a mere cub —  the idea of LION’S DEN, ADULT SUPERSTORE became something of a repository for longing, a wonderland hiding secrets and sugary snacks and perhaps something terrifying and animal or cute and furry. I suppose — and even now, I feel sheepish admitting this, but it is the truth — being on the way to the cemetery, being mysterious and all-caps-important as it was, that LION’S DEN, ADULT SUPERSTORE got a little bit mixed up in my imaginings of heaven. It was a store but adult and super; it was a place I would go when I left this body and inhabited a different one. We were en route to a graveyard, after all, a place where one could touch death. It did not seem so much of a stretch to imagine that the people underneath the ground had swum elsewhere. I added a landmark to my mental map. HEAVEN-SLASH-LION’S-DEN-ADULT-SUPERSTORE hovered somewhere out in the direction of the airport. 
***
I was surprised when, in our class discussion of Wright’s poem a few days after I happened upon it from my bed, we spent a while discussing the opening. In the first two lines, Wright appears to pretend the rest of the poem is not already printed on the page below. “I am almost afraid to write down / This thing,” he says. We hovered over this sentence for quite some time.
I did not understand what there was to discuss. I don’t know what they expected, my classmates, of a poem that almost did not get written. Perhaps a confessional — an admission of something subconscious and terrible. (We had read earlier in the term Elizabeth Bishop’s “One Art” in which she forces herself — “Write it!” — to admit the disastrous state her life has reached.) But those of us who know that pools are secret graveyards know that this is nothing to be ashamed of. That it is merely something difficult to grasp. Something so tender that writing it into existence might destroy it entirely. 
Of course, I felt, it is terrifying to write of pools. Of course it is terrifying to admit they stink of death. Of course all community-pool memories are germy and damp and fragile and holy, packed with sentimentalized renditions of childhood that cannot withstand the barrage of reality. I, too, am almost afraid to write of my beloved swimming pool. I fear I will write my way toward a truth I do not want to face; that the David H. Madison Community Swimming Pool I savor in my mind will reveal itself too shallow to contain the sentimentality I have poured inside it. 
I harbor a simmering resentment toward the people who fill the classrooms around here — these people who conceive of swimming pools as unglamorous oceans, who prefer cremation, who did not grow up a bike ride away from a graveyard that exerts a pull so strong that five generations of wandering Jews have roots sunk in its soil.  
They’ve done nothing wrong. They just don’t understand the anatomy of a day so empty it threatens to cave in on itself. They don’t know the salvation some of us seek in that vat of chlorinated water, a place where nothing much happens, either, except that at least you can watch the future version of yourself shepherd some toddlers into the kiddie pool and wonder whether you will ever in a million years be brave enough to hop on your bike and pedal far, far away. They cannot understand the ambiguity of the pool —the joy, the claustrophobia. They cannot conceive of the way we sink, like concrete, like gravel working its way into scraped knees. That we cannot heave ourselves out of the gunk sucking us inward, perhaps do not want to. And that even if we could, the rift would be a messy one. A clean break is impossible once the process of ingestion has begun. That we cannot tear ourselves away from death so easily. It hurts. It always leaves something behind.
See, I like cemeteries. Scattered ashes disappear, taking with them evidence of the body, the insistent corporeality of existence. Graveyards require you to stare at the grass that covers a person you used to touch, laugh at, call on the telephone. They offer fresh dirt for you to press your sneakers into and in doing so, force you to understand that yards beneath your own stretchy flesh is a wooden box that absorbs the shock of your weight. Burial insists there was meaning in a person’s life and provides evidence: we gather here, having driven across the country to cry in public as we watch someone move expensive dirt around, to mourn the passing of so-and-so. We ritualize the physicality of a human life: the introduction of casket, painted nails, favorite outfit, lowered gingerly into soft earth. 
I suppose one way of putting my affinity for this poem is that it comes down to a shared proximal geography. Probably mMost of the people who encounter this poem probably do not have such easy physical access to the various pits filled with people and feelings and memories that frame the cartographies of their lives. That is, I can bike to my pool and I can bike to my graveyard and I can bike home and I can bike to grannygrandpa’s house and I can bike from any of these places to the ice cream shop my mother took us to the day my sister died — hoping, she’d later explain by way of defense, that when we remembered that day, it could be a little bit sweet. 
I cannot say whether humans will be extinct one thousand years from now, but I can tell you exactly where my remains will be. 
***
I have loved you all this time,
And didn't even know
I am alive.

Eventually, in the poem, concrete makes way for life. As earlier, the narration seems untethered from reality, but whereas the initial conflation of pool and graveyard relied on an ambiguous refusal to commit to imagery, the final few stanzas depicts what transparently is a swimming pool, only one that seems somewhat supernaturally endowed. The pool is revealed, finally, as a hole “filled with water.” It becomes clear in this moment that the concrete never actually did the filling, not in the strict sense of the word; the poem lied about or obscured the magnitude of the concrete’s ability to saturate a space. The spirituality which once presented a dark afterlife mutates into something buoyant. The water seems so light it begins to float upward, lifting the speaker along with it. Another soul, something angelic, perhaps previously trapped within the concrete, drifts nearby. “A little girl who belonged to somebody else, / A face thin and haunted,”  whispers an affirmation: “Take care now, / Be patient, and live.” Is she a ghost? Is the speaker, who admits in the final stanza that he had not known, prior to revisiting this memory, that he was alive?
Someday I will return to the pool and my grandfather will not be cycling his skinny arms inside it. I will not see his funny goggles, the gigantic ones snorkelers wear, or his round, translucent belly, or the ragged swimming trunks crinkled beneath it. The pool will be choppy with the strokes of arms and legs and flipping heads that in this moment have never heard of Bexley, Ohio, that will be transported there many years from now because job and room for kids to breathe and whatever other reason people voluntarily displace themselves to the suburban midwest. My grandpa, meanwhile, will be sleeping a mile to the south, and his swim trunks will be decomposing into tiny pieces of synthetic flesh in his attic a few streets over. 
Nearby is an ice cream shop my mother took us to the day my sister died — hoping, she’d later explain by way of defense, that when we remembered that day, it could be a little bit sweet. What moves me about this ice cream memory of my mother’s is not the impossibly futile effort to sweeten death but her insistence that it  could taste like anything at all. MConsider: most experiences affect us and then leave, imparting lessons or joys like nutrients before passing through us like an unmemorable meal. This memory tastes like cotton candy ice cream. It will never be sweet — too chemically, garnished with a few drops of saltwater — but it remains inside me, hovering somewhere below my left kneecap.
